# The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen R. Covey

* [Canonical Source](https://www.franklincovey.com/courses/the-7-habits/)

* [Summary Post](https://www.reddit.com/r/productivity/comments/b0lu52/i_made_an_animation_to_summarise_the_best_lessons/)

* [Summary Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nGzZ9m_Xsg&t=1s)

## Introduction

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, written by Stephen R. Covey walks
readers through the principles and what it takes to achieve both personal and
professional success, and how this can be done by simply changing the way that
they view the world.

While there are some individuals who have achieved success outwardly on some
level, these individuals are still struggling with an inner need. They are still
falling short when it comes to developing healthy relationships with others.
They also have not mastered what it means to be personally effective. Covey
describes the 7 habits which, if applied correctly, will help you achieve the
success that you desire.

* Habit 1 ~ Be Proactive ~ The Principle of Choice

* Habit 2 ~ Begin With the End in Mind ~ The Principle of Purpose

* Habit 3 ~ Put First Things First ~ The Principle of Focus

* Habit 4 ~ Think Win-Win ~ The Principle of Abundance

* Habit 5 ~ Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood ~ The Principle of Respect

* Habit 6 ~ Synergize ~ The Principle of Creative Collaboration

* Habit 7 ~ Sharpen the Saw ~ The Principle of Renewal


## Habit 1: Be Proactive  ~ The Principle of Choice

Assume responsibility and focus on the things that can be influenced rather than
what can’t.

Habit 1 is about taking responsibility for our lives. This is the first habit
because every other habit depends on our ability to act proactively rather than
reactively—to make things happen rather than waiting for them to happen.

One of the key ideas in this habit is that we have the freedom to choose our
response. When things happen to us, we get to decide whether to focus on what we
can change or to get stuck waiting, complaining, and worrying.

One of the most important indicators of whether we’re responding proactively or
reactively is the language we use. When we use proactive language we say things
like “I can” or “I get to.” When we use reactive language we say things like “I
can’t” or “I have to.”

When we use consistent, proactive language it affirms our capacity to choose and
reflects and reinforces a proactive approach to life.


##  Habit 2 ~ Begin With the End in Mind ~ The Principle of Purpose

Define clear measures for success and create a plan to achieve them—in the next
few hours, over the next few months, or across a lifetime.

This habit is about having a plan. If we don’t make a conscious effort to
visualize who we are and what we want in life, then we empower other people and
circumstances to shape us instead. This habit is about identifying where we want
to go and who we want to be. It means defining the personal, moral, and ethical
guidelines that represent the life we want to live.

One of the best ways to incorporate Habit 2: Begin With the End in Mind into our
lives is to develop a Personal Mission Statement. It’s like writing our own
personal constitution. It reaffirms who we are, puts our goals in focus, and
moves our ideas into the real world.

Developing a personal mission statement means living by design rather than
default.


## Habit 3 ~ Put First Things First ~ The Principle of Focus

Prioritize and spend time on achieving the most important goals.

This habit is about protecting time for what’s most important to us. Habit 1
focuses our effort on what we can influence. Habit 2 aims us in the right
direction. Habit 3 is the day in, day out, moment-by-moment work that takes us
to that vision.

It’s common to think that managing our time is about managing the clock, but
it’s really about managing the compass. Our personal mission is true north.
Every decision we make about how to spend our time should be oriented toward
what’s most important. That means carefully assessing our roles and goals and
protecting time for the Big Rocks every week so they don’t get overwhelmed by
all the other things fighting for our attention.


## Habit 4 ~ Think Win-Win ~ The Principle of Abundance

Approach each situation looking for ways everyone can win.

This habit is a character-based code for human interaction and collaboration.

Most of us learn to base our self-worth on comparison and competition. We think
about succeeding in terms of someone else failing—if I win, they lose; or if
they win, I lose. Life becomes a zero-sum game. We start to believe there’s only
so much to go around, and if they get a big piece, there’s less for me; it’s not
fair, and I’m going to do everything I can to get my share.

These paradigms of scarcity are worth shifting. Win-win is about constantly
seeking mutual benefit in all human interactions—about finding solutions that
are truly beneficial and satisfying for everyone involved. To go for win-win, we
not only have to be empathic, but we also have to be confident. We not only have
to be considerate and sensitive, we also have to be brave.

That balance between courage and consideration is the essence of real maturity
and is fundamental to a win-win approach to life.


## Habit 5 ~ Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood ~ The Principle of Respect

Listen, understand, and honor others’ perspectives, and have the courage to
express thoughts and feelings respectfully.

This habit is about listening before we speak. We spend years learning how to
read, write, and speak. But what about listening? What training do we get that
enables us to listen so we really, deeply understand others? 

Our default tendency is to try to get our point across. In doing so, we may
ignore the other person completely, pretend that we’re listening, or focus on
the words and miss the meaning. At work, that means we might not fully
understand a problem before we go to solve it. At home, it might mean we miss
out on a chance at deeper connection with the people who matter most.

Habit 5 is about learning to suspend our desire to respond automatically. It’s
about practicing a deeper and more intentional kind of listening. And then, when
it is our time to be understood, it’s about expressing our point of view in a
clear and articulate way that keeps our audience’s needs in mind.


## Habit 6 ~ Synergize ~ The Principle of Creative Collaboration

Leverage different perspectives to solve problems, innovate, and achieve more
than any one individual alone.

"Habit 6: Synergize" is about working together to find new solutions to
challenging problems. Synergy is when the sum is greater than its parts. It’s
often expressed as an equation where 1 + 1 ~ 3, 10, or 1,000. Think of the
ingredients in a recipe coming together to create a dish or each instrument in
an orchestra creating a song. That’s synergy.

Synergy isn’t an accident, it’s a habit. There’s a process we can follow to get
there. For that process to work, we have to live all the other habits. If we’re
reactive, directionless, unfocused, fail to consider what others need, and don’t
listen to each other, we’ll never collaborate successfully. We’ll also never get
to synergy if we don’t value others’ ideas.

It’s truly valuing differences, instead of just tolerating them, that really
drives synergy. The ideas and perspectives of others are what allow us to get
outside or normal way of thinking to see the world, and the problems we’re
trying to solve together, in a new way.


## Habit 7 ~ Sharpen the Saw ~ The Principle of Renewal

Increase motivation, energy, and vitality by making time for renewal activities.

This habit is because dull or rusty tools are much less effective than clean and sharp tools. The same is true for us. This habit is about preserving and enhancing the greatest asset we have to deal with life and contribute—ourselves. It’s about balancing the four dimensions of body, heart, mind, and spirit.

As we spend time on each of these four dimensions of self, we create growth and change in our lives. We have the energy and vitality to practice the other six habits. We increase our capacity to produce results and handle the challenges around us.

Without spending regular time on renewal, we’ll quickly find ourselves on the path to burnout and exhaustion.
